Curious cassie’s harbour quest 


Chapter 1: One Too Many Experiments

Cassie is a curious 6 years old kid. She loves thinking and asking interesting questions. Cassie is eager to do lots of fun experiments today! Cassie’s 3-year-old brother Caleb is eager to join in her experiment expedition. In fact, they have just finished with their favourite experiment “exploding volcanoes”. 

Do you know what exploding volcanoes experiment is? Cassie and Caleb take a cup. They pour some vinegar until the cup is half empty, add some glitters and orange food colouring and a few drops of dish soap. Then they mix it with a spoon. The most fun part of the experiment is when they add a spoonful of soda bi-carbonate to this cup. Cassie and Caleb love watching the bubbling glowing lava rise up, explode and spread around! 

Exploding volcanoes was lots of fun. But they are very eager to do another experiment, something more exciting! “Mum! Mum! Can we do some new experiments? Can you please give us some ideas?” Cassie asks her mum. “Experiments? Hmh, but we are going to the Sydney Harbour soon. Dad has a nice surprise planned for you and Caleb.” mum tells Cassie. “Oh, that sounds fun, I love surprises,” Caleb says excitedly. Both Cassie and Caleb are thrilled to know they have a fun evening planned. But it’s the excitement of the experiment that they can’t resist. 

“Aww, just one experiment mum, please? We can do it quickly, maybe?” Cassie pleads to her mum.  “I am going to make some snacks, why don’t you join me and help out?” mum floats the idea of making snacks together. Cassie is a bit disappointed but is open to some baking fun, “Okay, Can we bake some chocolate cake?” she requests. She loves cake. And guess what? Caleb loves chocolate cake too! “Alright, let’s bake some chocolate cake” mum joins in delight. 

I can’t decide if we should make a sponge cake or a mud cake, mum explains her dilemma. She asks, “do you have a preference, kids?”. Oopsie, it seems Cassie loves sponge cake but Caleb loves mud cake. Mum is curious why Cassie’s choice is sponge cake when Caleb likes mud cake. Mum asks Cassie why she likes the sponge cake more. “I can’t quite tell the difference between the two. I just like sponge cake more. They feel soft and yummy in my tummy!” Cassie replies. Cassie does not like the feeling of not knowing why she loves sponge cake more. Mum then asks Caleb why he likes mud cake more. Caleb is also not very sure why he likes mud cake more but he thinks mud cake is creamy.  

“I have a great experiment idea, kids. Why don't we put on our scientist hats and do some cake experiments? We make both cakes and try them out to tell the differences between them?” Mum exclaimed. It's a fantastic idea I think!  Mum will have snacks, Cassie and Caleb will have their experiments and everyone gets their favourite cake. What is not to like about this idea? Nothing right? Absolutely nothing! Oh, Cassie and Caleb are already doing a winning dance! “Yes! Yes” they cheered.  

Let’s gather the ingredients kids, says mum. Cassie starts to recount the ingredients - “we will need chocolate” she says grinning from ear to ear Mum chuckles and join in Cassie’s excitement “yes, of course! Chocolate!”. What else kids? Caleb suddenly recalls “sugar!”! Cassie adds on, “then we will need flour,  butter, …”. Cassie and Caleb are now thinking, they can’t quite recall anything else. They think that’s all they need to make a cake. What do you think? Is that all? How about eggs? Mum is thrilled that the kids knew so many ingredients. She congratulates them and tells them the additional ingredients they need. “Well done kids, you know so many ingredients to make the cake! We will also need eggs and baking soda. As for mud cake, we will also need a special ingredient - milk”. 

Cassie is curious now, very very curious! “Oh wait, mum, so we need exactly the same ingredients for both cakes except for milk?” she asks. “I like how you are paying attention Cassie, well done! As a matter of fact, yes, it’s just milk that extra in mud cake.” mum tells. She adds, “you know what, it’s not just the ingredients but also the quantity that matters. How much of the ingredients you use is important..”. “Ooh! That’s very interesting mum, so both cakes are made of the same ingredients. It’s just we add some ingredients more and some less,?” Cassie is thinking aloud. “That is right Cassie. It’s egg and butter actually! Mud cakes are dense and heavy, just like Caleb said. They need more butter and less egg to give them that dense taste. Eggs help the cake rise up making it light and fluffy. That’s why sponge cakes have more eggs and less butter - to make them light and fluffy! The milk in mud cake makes it even denser - creamier and moist!” explains mum. 

Everyone is enjoying mixing ingredients but Cassie is thinking! She is full of questions right now. “What is being dense even mean? How can I say mud cake is denser than sponge cake?” Cassie asks, looking at her mum with her beautiful bubbly eyes. 

“Brilliant question Cassie!”. Density is a way to tell how heavy something is. If you take two glasses and fill one with water and the other with your banana smoothie, which one do you think will be heavier? Mum asks. Cassie thinks for a bit, she thinks the smoothie one will be heavier. But she wants to be absolutely sure! She was up for experiments anyway, was not she? “Go on, test it out, Cassie! Use the weighing scale if you like” mum encourages her. On she goes and tests it out! Yes! She was right, it’s smoothie glass that’s heavier! “So you filled two same-size glasses with two different drinks and one is heavier than the other. It’s because the heavier one is denser i.e. the heavier one is made of denser stuff! Makes sense?” mum explains. “Kind of,” replies Cassie. 

She is thrilled! She is measuring unstoppably. She measures milk with butter, and sugar with flour and finds butter to be denser than milk and sugar to be denser than flour! This is so much fun! Cassie is super excited to have learnt about density. She is even wondering if she can tell which one is denser without even measuring. If she keeps observing maybe she can develop an instinct for density. What do you think?

“Wow! That is so fascinating mum! This is one fun experiment!” says Cassie.  “Yum yum, when can we eat it mum?” asks Caleb, feeling ever so peckish. Cassie giggles. “Hey, that rhymes,” she says. Caleb’s plea makes everyone laugh! Caleb is impatient about chocolates! Are not you?

Ding goes the oven! The cakes are ready! They all take a slice of both cakes and dig in. Cassie is paying extra attention to how the cakes feel on her tongue and in her belly. She loves eggs but now she is even more in love with eggs for they make her sponge cake so fluffy, light and well, spongy! What a fantastic egg-periment oops experiment full-time they had.

“The true method of knowledge is experiment.”
WIlliam Blake


Chapter 2: Beautiful Fishes


“When are we going to the harbour mum?” Caleb calls. In fact, he has already asked 50 times in the last hour! “All right kid, it’s time to get ready and get moving! We are going to the harbour” mum announced. Cassie has her detective hat on! She is investigating what surprise dad has planned for her and Caleb. She has been to Sydney Harbour a few times and she absolutely loves the bridge walk! Watching the sunset from the harbour is one of her favourite things to do! But mum said “surprise”, so it is something new perhaps. But neither mum nor dad is letting on any clues! Tough luck Cassie! She will just have to wait for her surprise, I think!

Cassie and Caleb hop in their car seats. Mum checks with the kids if they are ready to go. “All set, are we ready to go?” she asks. “Yes!!” yelped both Cassie and Caleb in unison. “Oui Surprise! Here we come! Oui, Oui, Oui!” calls Cassie cheekily. Dad is loading eski in the car. Mum is loading something special that looks like a stick - it is black and red coloured. Cassie and Caleb feel that this stick has to do with surprise somehow. “What is that stick thing mum?” Caleb asks. “Well, it’s called a fishing rod!” mum replies. 

“Fishing! Are we going fishing? Is that our surprise?” Cassie calls out. “Oops, did mum just let out our secret!” says Dad. How funny! Mum let the cat out of the bag today! Cassie is feeling very proud. She feels like she is the best detective in the whole wide world - like sherlock holmes! 

Cassie and Caleb have never gone fishing before. They are very excited. Before you know it, Caleb jumps in asking “Are we there yet?”. Cassie just rolls her eyes and says “Not yet!”. Of course, they have just started driving.

“How do we do fishing daddy?” Cassie is curious. She wants to be prepared for her adventurous day at the harbour. “It might be easier to show than explain Cassie. Let’s me try explaining anyhow, just be patient okay?.” says Dad. He wants to lay out the rules first. “There are two rules for fishing. The rule number one is Slip, Slop, Slap!” Daddy says and starts singing the classic Australian sun safe song by Cancer Council. “Slip, Slop, Slap!”. Cassie, Caleb and mum join in singing “It sounds like a breeze when you say it like that. Slip, Slop, Slap! In the sun we always say "Slip Slop Slap!" Slip, Slop, Slap! Slip on a shirt, slop on sunscreen and slap on a hat, Slip, Slop, Slap!”. They are all ready for a sunny outdoor day with hats and sunscreen on!

“Rule 2 of fishing is to be nice and kind to the fish and our environment. We will safely release any fish we catch. okay?” daddy continues explaining the ground rules. “Yes sir” Cassie and Caleb acknowledge. We have some fish food like worms etc that are called bait. We stick the bait on the hook of the fishing rod that your mum was loading in the car. We lower the hook in the water. When the fish rush to grab the food from the hook, they get stuck on the hook. We gently reel them hook back pulling the fish towards us.” daddy explains the fishing technique. “We will just going to say hello to the fishes! We will feed the fish, take lots of photos, and make a journal of how many kinds of fish we saw and what we learnt about them. How does that sound?” Daddy asks. Cassie and Caleb can’t wait to see the fishes of the harbour and learn all about them!

“Can we play with the fishes daddy?” Caleb asks. “No! Fish can not live without water.” Cassie replies sternly. “If you are lucky, maybe some fish will swim near you and play spot me if you can game. You think?” mum gives some hope to Caleb.  “How do the fishes even breathe in the water? Why can’t they live on earth? asks Cassie. Are you thinking what Cassie is thinking too? Do you know why? 

“Fishes have a special organ called gills. It helps them breathe. When water rushes through the gills, little tissues of the gills transfer oxygen from the water into the fish’s bloodstream. The gills only know how to work with water and get oxygen. Gills cant work with air, unfortunately.” mum explains. She asks, “do you know what that means, kids?”. It means that fish can’t breathe on earth. They must stay in the water. Cassie is amazed to know that there are special organs to breathe in water as well! 

Mum suddenly recalls a fun fact. She tells them about a rare group of special types of fishes called “air-breathing fishes”. These fishes have an additional special organ that can help them breathe in air.  Lungfish is one such special fish type. These fishes also have lungs, a pair,  just like us and can breathe air for a short time. Do you want to know another interesting thing? Australian Lungfish is the only Lungfish of its kind that has only 1 lung. All other lungfishes have a pair of lungs just like us! “Really? Can we please see them today?” Cassie and Caleb are super excited to meet these special creatures. “I am sorry buddy, they are not found in the harbour. They are found in Queensland, a bit far from us. Perhaps another day, okay?” dad tells them. Never mind, they are thrilled to learn how cool and amazing nature is. 



“I love seeing fishes swim. It’s beautiful watching them wiggle their little tails. “ Caleb says. “Can you please tell us how fishes swim daddy?” requests Cassie. “Of course” says daddy excitedly. He tells them, “Fishes have beautiful flat, flexible and bony organs around their body. These are called fins. There are 6 types of fins actually. Can you believe it? They help fishes move up, down, left, right and all around. 

“Wow, 6 fins to swim! How cool is that. I am learning to swim without any fins, just legs and arms that I have for walking” says Cassie cheekly, trying to gather mum and dad’s sympathies. “Dont worry Cassie, very soon your teachers will get you on swimming gear called ‘fins’. They are a artificial fins made of plastic! We will see you swim beautifully like fishes then right?” mum calls out. “Woah, artifical fins, I cant wait to wear them! Would I also get 6 fins like fishes? ” Cassie has lots of enthusiasm and lots of questions.  “Just one, Cassie. Same as Caudal fins in fishes” mum replies. “Whatty, what? What caudal?” chuckles Cassie. She did not quite get the name of one of the fins. Dad tells Cassie all about the 6 fin’s name: dorsal, pactoral, adipose, caudal, anal and pelvic but she is not impressed. She find these names to be tricky and tongue twister. 

Wow! Fishes have so many things to help them swim. They are so lucky! “I want to very carefully notice how fishes swim and use their fins” Caleb says excitedly. “Sounds great buddy” says dad commending Caleb for his quest!


Fishes in the water 
Fishes in the sea
Swim swim swim
Little fishes swim

Paddling through the water
With many little fins,
Pectoral, caudal, anal and dorsal,
Many little fins that fishes wiggle in

￼

Pushing through the water
Paddling through the sea
Flexing their bodies
Little fishes swim



Fishes in the water 
Fishes in the sea
Swim swim swim
Little fishes swim

Water gushes through 
Their tiny little gills
Giving oxygen, 
To tiny little fish 

Splash, slopsh, splish 
Fishes in water 
Fishes in the sea
Splash splosh splish
 


Chapter 3: Buoyancy Quest


Dad is parking the car. Yay! They have arrived - let the fishing begin! The harbour is so beautiful. There is the Opera house on one side and Luna park on the other side. There are so many beautiful yachts and catamarans! “Oh wait, How are these boats even swimming? They don’t have fins?” asks Caleb eagerly. “The boats are not swimming Caleb, they are floating! They are part in the water and part in the air. It’s called  floating. When you are swimming, you are mostly in the water” mum explains. “Ah, I see! How do things even float?” asks Cassie, joining in the conversation. 

“Excellent question kids,” mum says. She continues on. “Remember gravity - something we learnt when we went to Cronulla beach the other day?” mum asks. “Gravity pulls everything to the ground. It also makes jumping so much fun!” cheered both Cassie and Caleb as they jump twice giggle in delight. Kids indeed remember their adventurous day when they went to Cronulla breach and celebrated Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries. Be sure to check out “Curious Cassie’s beach ride quest: a celebration of Sir Isaac Newton’s discoveries” book from the Curious Cassie series if you want to learn all about gravity with Cassie.  

“When the boat is in water, gravity will try to pull it down and bring it to the bottom of the harbour. Right? But there is also another interesting force. Its called buoyancy. Buoyancy forces boat to rise up in the water. If the boat will float or not is decided by a fun competition between gravity and buoyancy actually. Gravity is trying to pull the boat down and buoyancy is trying the push the boat up. It the boat sinks that means gravity has won and if the boat floats then buoyancy has won” mum explains. 

“What? Wow!” Cassie has her eyes wide open. She is amazed and wants to know all about this new force buoyancy. “Does buoyancy helps you swim as well?” asks Cassie. “As a matter of fact, it does.” mum tells commending Cassie. “The strength of buoyancy will be as strong as the amount of water the boat moved.” mum says. “Huh?” both Cassie and Caleb are a not sure what it means. Lets do another experiment mum says. 

Mum take out the strong box thats full of chips. She empties it and fills it with water - all the way up to the brim actually. She takes my apple juice bottle and ask Caleb and Cassie to feel it. She asks “is the bottle heavy?”. “No, its very light.” both the kids reply. Mum then plops it in the box. Splash!! Some water splashes out of the storage box but the bottle is floating! “I put bottle in the box full of water. It pushed some water out right? Right now, gravity is pulling the bottle down but buoyancy is pushing the bottle up. The bottle is very very light so the force of gravity is not very strong. The water removed by the bottle is enough to make buoyancy stronger than gravity. That’s why the bottle is floating” mum explains. 

“Want to see another cool thing?” Mum asks. She takes the bottle out and fills it up with water. She asks the kids to feel if the bottle is now heavier or lighter. Must be heavy right? Yes, it’s now filled with water so heavier indeed. She plops the bottle in the water. Doh, it’s sinking .. it’s sinking.. It’s sunk! What just happened? Cassie and Caleb tried themselves too. Everytime they tried, the bottle just sank. They even tried empting the bottle and plopping it in - this time it floated. Exciting! But how, what just happened? Mum continues explaining “When we filled the bottle with water, the bottle was much heavier. It means gravity was much stronger than before. But the water moved by the bottle was still about the same as last time. Force of gravity was stronger than buoyancy when the bottle was filled. That’s why it sank”. 

“I love this experiment. I can even do this at home with pots, even in bathtub” says Cassie. “Thanks for telling us mum.” she says looking straight ahead. She spots a ginormous ship coming to the wharf. The people on the ship, throws a large anchor in the water. Splash it goes and sinks in the water. Cassie is thrilled, she called in Caleb to show that anchor is actually sinking. The gravity won and pulled the achor down. The boats however is floating meaning gravity lost and buoyancy won. How curious Cassie thinks. “I dont get it mum. The boat is so ginormous. It has to be heavy than the anchor. How did the anchor sink and the boat is still floating” Cassie asks.

Mum is enjoying the curious conversation she is having with the kids. She reminds Cassie that the amount of water the boat moves is much much larger than what anchor has moved. She tells them an interesting fact about the bottom of the ship. “Did you know that the bottom of the ship is called the hull. Its designed to be mostly empty and vessel like so when its on the water it removes lots and lots of water. This special design makes ship move so much more water than they can easily fight gravity full and stay afloat!” mum tell them. “How cool. Its like a bowl.” replies Cassie paying extra attention to the hull of the ship. 

“Do you want to know another funny story?” mum asks. She continues on “Archimedes was the famous Greek mathematician and physicist who explained buoyancy. He was told to find out if kings crown maker has been stealing gold from the crown. He kept thinking long and hard on how to resolve this matter but he not winning. One day, he was going for bath and had his tub full of water. When he entered into the tub he realised that the more his body sinks into the water, the more water splashes out. He was lit up! He thought he can use the moved water to measure things. He thought to put the same amount of gold given to the crown maker first and measure how much water falls out. Then measure again with the made crown. His idea was to compare the water moved by these two things. If the crown is made of pure gold, the water removed will be same.” It’s a cool idea Cassie thinks.


Mum also tells them “It seems he was so excited by his idea that he ran naked to the king to tell him that he has cracked the problem!”.  Cassie and Caleb are giggling. Dad adds on, “You  know what he was yelling excitedly? He was saying ‘Eureka! Eureka!’ Eureka is a Greek word meaning I have found it!!”. Cassie and Caleb are giggling and now running yelping ‘Eureka! Eureka!


“Remember ‘density’ that we were talking about when we were doing the cake experiment? We were checking if mud cake is denser than sponge? ” mum asks. Cassie nods. Mum is telling so many fun things today. She adds on “Density of liquid impacts the buoyant force. The more dense the liquid is the stronger the buoyant force on the object will be. You can try an experiment at home if you like and experience it yourself. Just like how you filled the box with water and tried to float the bottle, you can repeat it but fill the box with different density of liquids. You could try using vegetable oil or smoothies or other types of liquids and see what happens when you try to float different things. You may find some things are easier to float in denser liquid like oil”. Cassie likes the fun experiment idea but ‘density’ has just reminded her of sponge cakes! .Daddy and Caleb are rubbing their belly. Looks like they also want a slice!! 

Caleb spots a balloon as they are munching on their snacks. “Oh look the balloon is floating in the sky!” Caleb cries. “Thats another great example of buoyancy Caleb” dad adds. Cassie is excited and wants to share what she has just learnt. She goes on explaining “The ballon is filled with air. It is very light. The gravity is trying to pulling it down. The air is also applying buoyant force on it. In the battle of gravity vs buoyancy, the buoyancy wins! There we have our beautiful red balloon floating in the air!”. Everyone chuckles in delight. 

Mum is smiling, looks like she has another fascinating thing to share. She tells them “Some special fishes have more special organs to help them swim. Some bony fishes are heavy. The gravitation force for them will be stronger. So they will struggle to swim. To help with swimming, these fishes have a special organ called swim bladder. This bladder is like a ballon. They can fill air in it become bigger so they can move more water.”. “What?” Cassie is surprised. Balloon in the body! 

Its been a great fun day for Cassie and Caleb. They have learnt so many things and have so many experiments to try at home. 




Chapter 4: Marine Biology Champions 

“I am excited Caleb. I have learnt so many things about cakes, density, fishes, floating, swimming, boats and balloon. Whats your favourite thing that you learnt today Caleb” Cassie asks. Caleb jumps and yells “Eureka! Eureka!!”. Cassie joined in celebrating Archimedes quest! 

Dad sets up for fishing. He puts the bait on the hook of the fishing rod and cast the rod in the harboour. He gives one to Caleb and one to Cassieme. He tells them that they have to be patient now and wait for the fishes to come. Cassie is getting her camera setup and ready to go. Caleb has his drawing notebook and crayons ready. Remember, they want to make a journal! 

Something is pulling Caleb’s rod! Caleb yells “Daddy, Daddy, I think I got a fish”. Dad comes over to help Caleb. Indeed Caleb has found a Mulloway fish. Dad tells them all about Mulloway fish. He points to all the 6 fins on Caleb’s catch and also shows the gills and the eyes. Cassie jumps in asking “Does Mulloway fish have swim bladder too?”. “I am not sure Cassie.” mum says. She looks for more info on the internet and tells them that as a matter of fact, yes, Mulloway fish have swim bladder. Caleb is very proud of his catch. As promised, he releases the fish back in the harbour with his dad’s help. 

Cassie rod is getting a pull too! Woah! She is on to say hello to another fish perhaps. Dad helps Cassie out. Look out, she caught Mullet fish. They say hello to the Mullet fish and help to release her back to harbour. “These Mullet fishes are very cheeky fishes. They are known for jumping in the water.” mum tells Cassie and Caleb. Cassie’s jaw is wide open in amazement. “JUMPING?” she says. “How does one even jump in water?” she adds. “Same as you do Cassie, you propel yourself upward using your muscles, isn’t it? It’s just that Mullet does it in water!” tells mum. She continues “You know mullet does this to breath oxygen from air! Remember how we talked about some fishes can breathe air for a short while. Mullet is one of them!”. Cassie is proud of her catch too. 

Caleb spots a plastic bag floating in the water. “Mum, look plastic bag!” he says. Mum is sad. She calls “Oh no! This is not good for fishes and the marine life.”. Mum takes Caleb’s fishing rod and scoops the plastic bag and chucks it in the a nearby bin. “Good job mum” dad said. 

On their way out of harbour, the kids spot a group of people with their snorkelling gears on. Looks like they are heading for dive and snorkelling in the harbour. Dad shares a short conversion with the group and is very impressed. He comes to tell us that the people in the group are scientists from the Sydney University. Their job is to study marine biology and help keep our fishes and under water friends safe. 

He tells us about Emma Johnston, a great australian marine biologists. She was so passionate about marine life and their safety that she made it her job to protect them. She is done some very awesome work around the world. Dad tells them that she is the authority in marine ecology and  President of Science & Technology Australia. She collaborate with many brilliant folks, helps with lots of great work thats going around the harbour. 

Wow they kids have learnt so much today. They have plenty to write in their journal now. 


